New governance policy draft (#1)
IntersectMBO/documentation: open-source-committee/policies/governance.md

# Open Source Governance Policy

## High-level overview

This is the high-level structure that this policy is aiming for:

- Development work is organized around individual projects and groups of projects.
- Projects are autonomous and consensus-driven, but also equipped with an official and transparent decision-making body.
- The Technical Steering Committee is ultimately responsible for ensuring that the principles are followed, and has a formal decision-making body that can progress even when consensus is hard to find.
- Projects are accountable to the TSC, and this should affect their behaviour, but this accountability is only formally invoked in exceptional cases.

## Conformance

This policy mostly aims to provide a sensible default.
Therefore most of its statements use "should".

> There are a few exceptions, and these are indicated by the use of "must".

Author: There's existing prose [here](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/documentation/blob/master/open-source-committee/policies/introduction.md) that says we're using RFC-2119. This is just explaining why this policy mostly uses "should".

<details>
<summary><b>Examples</b></summary>

> * The PMC for a meta-project wants to give the person acting as release manager a veto on votes to perform a release.

Author: We've gone around the houses on this: first I did it as you suggested, then I had a block at the beginning with quick definitions; now I have a separate glossary. Different people complained about each approach :joy:

What I really want is _proper_ glossary support a la https://sublime-and-sphinx-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/glossary.html

   * Care should be taken that the Maintainers are not then more powerful than their Merit, and more scrutiny should be applied to giving people the role.
   * If this is part of a move towards increased centralization of authority then it might be bad from a Sustainability perspective.
* The PMC wants to use a communication channel that meets the requirements, but is different from the channel used by most other projects.
   * Having non-standard “interfaces” makes the project harder to work with, and makes it harder for contributors to know how to interact with it, so this is mildly damaging to Sustainability. It may nonetheless be a good decision if there are other reasons to do it.
* The PMC wants to elect a “Benevolent Dictator For Life” (BDFL) and then have them make final decisions without recourse to the TSC.
   * This is problematic: without the TSC as part of the escalation chain we cannot be sure that we maintain the Legitimacy of the project. Having a BDFL is also bad for Merit (in the future other contributors may be more meritorious) and Sustainability (better to have a wider set of competent contributors)

</details>

## Decision-making

> Decision making should generally be done in a consensus-seeking manner. 

Author: RFC 2119 does not mandate capitalization, personally I don't think it adds much in this context

> Decision making should generally be done in a consensus-seeking manner. 

Author: happy to be persuaded otherwise, though

> That is, ideally decisions should have consensus, but we do not generally formally require that, and if it fails we have more structured methods available.

Author: The escalation policy

   * Gets a review from a fellow committer before merging
      * This is generally a good idea. This is also a small example of consensus-building by seeking input from another contributor on whether the idea is good or not.
   * Brings it to the PMC meeting for discussion before merging
      * This is a good idea if the contributor feels unsure about whether the change is going to be agreeable or not. Discussion might also happen on other communications channels.

</details>

### Voting

Voting is a simple way to build consensus, by asking each member of the group to explicitly state their preference.
Voting can be used either to seek a binding consensus, or simply to get a partial gauge of sentiment.

The standard voting process is for voters to issue one of the following votes: 

* +1: positive vote
* 0: abstention
* -1: negative vote

Normally when seeking a binidng decision, a majority should be sufficient to decide in favour of a motion, but in some circumstances it may be appropriate to treat any negative vote as a veto. 

> This is because the point is to elicit a group consensus: if the vote does not seem like enough for the group to settle on the outcome, then it may be necessary to escalate.

Author: I added a similar exmaple

<summary><b>Examples</b></summary>

* A project wants to adopt an auto-formatter. Much discussion is had and there is no consensus, but nobody is going to be that put out by not getting their favourite outcome, so the PMC just votes and takes the majority option.
* The PMC votes on whether to accept a controversial patch. There is a majority, but several of the most knowledgeable committers vote against, citing security concerns. The PMC does not feel like they have consensus despite the majority and decides to escalate.
* A committer wants to make a minor change. Nobody has very strong opinions, and so the secretary puts it to a vote. A few "+1"s come in, and nobody votes against, so the committer continues on the basis of some positive sentiment.

</details>

### Escalating issues

Issues that a group cannot resolve themselves should be escalated so that we can continue to make progress. 
These can be technical problems, social problems, or conflicts between principles.

The default escalation pathway is:

1. The Project Management Committee
2. The meta-project Project Management Committee, if there is one
3. The Technical Steering Committee

Anyone can escalate an issue. 

> Issues raised by Committers *must* be considered by the relevant body, issues raised by other people should be considered but may be ignored if they lack merit.

Author: The point is to explicitly give bodies the mandate to ignore spam, poor quality, or unjustified complaints. If you are a committer you have the right to be heard, otherwise not. I'm not sure how better to phrase this :thinking:

> Issues raised by Committers *must* be considered by the relevant body, issues raised by other people should be considered but may be ignored if they lack merit.

Author: I guess what the mention of merit here is trying to do is to point out that you still need to apply the principles: you have the power to ignore people, but you shouldn't do it just because you don't like them.

<details>
<summary><b>Rationale</b></summary>

In order to maintain Legitimacy, projects *must* remain accountable to the Technical Steering Committee (TSC).
That means that the TSC has to operate as the final decision-making body also for disputes.
But the TSC cannot arbitrate everything, so we have to have a sensible chain of decision-making bodies between an individual contributor and the TSC.

We restrict the *right* to be heard to Committers in order to avoid the risk of being flooded with meritless issues.

> However the intention is that attention should always be paid to meritiorious issues.

Author: Then you escalate to the next body up. But at the moment you have no standing, so you may still be ignored.

I don't know of a way to ensure that justified complaints by people without standing are heard while also having the right to ignore spam...

   * This is a conflict between Legitimacy and Quality
* Security issues are sensitive, and so must not be disclosed publicly
   * This is a conflict between Quality/Sustainability and Transparency
* A well-regarded contributor is a member of the PMC but consistently behaves badly
   * This is a conflict between Merit and Sustainability

</details>

## Projects

A project is the unit of organization of software development at Intersect. 
A project is organized around some number of source code repositories and the people who work on them. 
Every source code repository in the Intersect organization must be owned by a project.

A project is governed by a committee of its committers, the Project Management Committee (PMC).

A project can have multiple repositories, but it is the set of committers must be the same across all of them. 

A project should have a single "main" repository.
Any project-level information (e.g. the membership of the PMC) should be recorded in the documentation for this repository, and all other project repositories should clearly point to it in their documentation.

### Project Management Committee

The PMC is a committee of the Committers of the project. 

> The PMC is responsible for making project-level decisions and electing Committers.

Author: Okay, I need to clarify this: the PMC is not a _subset_ of the Committers, it is coextensive with the Committers. There is no additional process to be a member of the PMC.

The PMC has two administrative roles associated with it, the Chair and the Secretary. 
The Chair is responsible for organizing and running meetings, and the Secretary for keeping written material in order. 
The Chair and the Secretary are elected by the PMC. The Chair and the Secretary need not be Committers. 
If there is no Chair or the PMC is failing to appoint a Chair, then Intersect may appoint an interim Chair.

> PMC meetings should be held regularly, be public, and be advertised on the public communications channel. 

Author: I don't know. This is an example of this policy trying to be soft. I can imagine there being good reason to not want to do this - perhaps your members are ideologically opposed to synchronous meetings and want to actually do everything asynchronously.

> PMC meetings should be held regularly, be public, and be advertised on the public communications channel. 

Reviewer: I agree that we can leave freedom to the projects here, the initial "Conformance" section would dictate that, if you want to deviate you can.. but should also explain why. (If this is not clear enough yet, we should improve the overall conformance part)

Committers have a right to speak, others may be allowed to speak at the discretion of the Chair.

The PMC should make decisions in the usual consensus-seeking manner. 
If it needs to vote, the Committers are the voters. 
Votes should be held via the public communications channel to ensure that Committers are notified.

> 

Author: I don't think we need to formalise that. The perspective of this document is that Contributors are more like random members of the general public who you might have a slightly friendlier relationship with. If that relationship is very friendly indeed, then perhaps they should be Committers.

### Roles

Roles are per-project. 
All roles are non-exclusive, an individual may hold any number of roles.

The role assignments for a project should be listed in a discoverable way. 
For the roles which are associated with membership of a GitHub Team, it is enough to say that the team exists.

#### Development

There are three primary roles associated with doing development work.

1. Contributors are anyone who contributes to the project in any way. There is no formal requirement to be a contributor, but it is useful to have a way to refer to them.

> 2. Committers are people who have been given commit access to the project. Committers are also required to participate in the project governance process - the two go together.

Author: this is just prose, not a policy statement

3. Maintainers are individuals who have contributed in a sustained and substantial way to the project, and who commit to keeping the project healthy. Maintainers mostly have additional responsibilities and little additional power. They are likely to be influential, but this is because influential people should be made Maintainers, rather than vice versa.

<details>
<summary><b>Rationale</b></summary>

* Maintainers

>    * We know there are likely to be paid maintainers, it is helpful to recognize this in some official way.

Author: The current perspective of this document is that people's affiliation or not with any particular corporate entity shouldn't affect how governance works. Perhaps you want a more generalized conflict-of-interest policy. I think that might be reasonable, not sure.

| Secretary     |                                                                                                                      | Take minutes during PMC meetings; ensure that minutes are published publicly; send out votes and tally responses |
	

| GitHub Team             | Permissions                         | Notes                                                         |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| `<project>`             | Parent team for other project teams |                                                               |
| `<project>-committers`  | Write                               |                                                               |
| `<project>-maintainers` | Maintain                            |                                                               |
| `<project>-admins`      | Admin                               | Only appropriately vetted Intersect staff can be in this team |

### Communications

> Projects *must* have a primary public, durable, and asynchronous public channel. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Projects *MUST* have a primary public, durable, and asynchronous public channel. 
```

> Meeting minutes and votes should be sent out on this channel. 

Reviewer 2: If there is a requirement that the project MUST have an asynchronous public channel on the Intersect platform, MUSTn't the minutes and vote history also be public to be fully transparent?

Author: I'm confused, this line says that minutes and votes go on the public channel, therefore they _are_ public?

Reviewer 2: I guess it's the mixing of the MUST in the line above and the "should" in the line following. So there must exist an async comms channel, but it's only a SHOULD recommendation that the minutes and votes be published on this channel, which leaves it open to the PMC to decide whether or not they do?

Author: Ah right, that's a good point. I think you're right: what I want to say is that you must make them public and you should do that by putting them out on your normal channel, but if you want to publicise them some other way that's potentially fine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Meeting minutes and votes *must* be sent out on the PMC's asynchronous public channel. Minutes and voting records *should* be released on other public platforms at the discretion of the PMC.
```

> This *must* be on a standard Intersect platform (TBD).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This *MUST* be on a standard Intersect platform (TBD).
```

> Projects *must* also have a public, real-time chat channel for discussions. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Projects *MUST* also have a public, real-time chat channel for discussions. 
```

> This *must* be on a standard Intersect platform (TBD).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This *MUST* be on a standard Intersect platform (TBD).
```

# Open Source Governance Policy

NOTE: Please consult the [glossary](./glossary.md) for definitions of terms and acronyms.

## High-level overview

This is the high-level structure that this policy is aiming for:

- Development work is organized around individual projects and groups of projects.
- Projects are autonomous and consensus-driven, but also equipped with an official and transparent decision-making body.
- The Technical Steering Committee is ultimately responsible for ensuring that the principles are followed, and has a formal decision-making body that can progress even when consensus is hard to find.
- Projects are accountable to the TSC, and this should affect their behaviour, but this accountability is only formally invoked in exceptional cases.

> ## Conformance

Reviewer: Maybe this is due to a better layout in Gitbook (can't review this), but I think duplicating this section and making the policy wrap around two markdown documents is suboptimal.

Currently, we only have a OSC policy and having a single document would make it cleaner to follow IMO (will we ever have more? YAGNI?)

* The PMC wants to use a communication channel that meets the requirements, but is different from the channel used by most other projects.
   * Having non-standard “interfaces” makes the project harder to work with, and makes it harder for contributors to know how to interact with it, so this is mildly damaging to Sustainability. It may nonetheless be a good decision if there are other reasons to do it.
* The PMC wants to elect a “Benevolent Dictator For Life” (BDFL) and then have them make final decisions without recourse to the TSC.
   * This is problematic: without the TSC as part of the escalation chain we cannot be sure that we maintain the Legitimacy of the project. Having a BDFL is also bad for Merit (in the future other contributors may be more meritorious) and Sustainability (better to have a wider set of competent contributors)

</details>

## Decision-making

Decision making should generally be done in a consensus-seeking manner. 
That is, ideally decisions should have consensus, but we do not generally formally require that. If consensus fails we have more structured methods available (escalation).

> The general decision-making process is:

Reviewer: Do we want to imply that the list below is prioritized? i.e. each project can decide form themselves, but should consider classifying some proccesses to be sufficiently done using lazy consensus? OTOH try not to escalate everything?

It's a bit implied here by using an ordered list, but maybe adding a word or two to indicate that more explicitly could improve this policy?

Author: Yes thanks, it was supposed to be prioritised/you go through it in order!

1. [Lazy consensus](https://community.apache.org/committers/lazyConsensus.html): just act based on what you think people will want. If nobody objects then everything is fine.
2. [Consensus-building](https://community.apache.org/committers/consensusBuilding.html): seek indications of consensus from the relevant group
   1. Voting: the relevant group votes explicitly (this is an example of consensus-building since it aims to get the group to come to a more explicit consensus)

> 3. Escalation: the issue is raised to a higher decision-making body

Reviewer: I like that we suggest these three levels concretely.

Do we want to add a guideline that each project _must_ state what decision making process is used for it's processes, i.e. in their charter / contribution guidelines?

Author: Yes, good idea

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Examples</b></summary>

* Two contributors disagree about whether a patch should be accepted or not.
   * This may just be a simple disagreement that should be escalated to the PMC, but might go further than that depending on how tricky the issue is.
* A contributor makes a significant contribution, which is rejected by the PMC for not being good enough quality. The contributor thinks that this is incorrect, and it is good enough. They appeal to the TSC.
   * This is a more serious problem. They might also want to appeal to the OSC if they think the PMC is actually behaving badly, not just mistakenly.
* There is a proposal to implement a CIP that was accepted and planned for by the TSC. A highly respected contributor believes that there is a problem with the proposal and refuses to accept it.
   * This is a conflict between Legitimacy and Quality
* Security issues are sensitive, and so must not be disclosed publicly
   * This is a conflict between Quality/Sustainability and Transparency
* A well-regarded contributor is a member of the PMC but consistently behaves badly
   * This is a conflict between Merit and Sustainability

</details>

> ## Projects

Reviewer: I think we _could_ move this as the first section (and move decision making down) as it kind of sets the stage / context in which decisions are needed. WDYT?

Author: I also thought about that. I really don't know. There basically just are two things we want to discuss: structure and decision making. And they each refer to each other. So I think whichever one comes first is going to have some awkward forward-references to the other. E.g. if the project part comes first then when we talk about voting it's a forward reference to the decision-making section :shrug:

A project is the unit of organization of software development at Intersect. 

> A project is organized around some number of source code repositories and the people who work on them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A project consists of one or more source code repositories and the people who work on them.
```

Not so sure if "consists" is good here, but saying "one or more" is probably a good idea here (more explicit than "some")

Every source code repository in the Intersect organization must be owned by a project.

A project is governed by a committee of its committers, the Project Management Committee (PMC).

> A project can have multiple repositories, but the set of committers must be the same across all of them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a project is comprised of multiple repositories, the set of committers must be the same across all of them.
```

A project should have a single "main" repository.
Any project-level information (e.g. the membership of the PMC) should be recorded in the documentation for this repository, and all other project repositories should clearly point to it in their documentation.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Multiple projects can be grouped into "meta-projects". The PMC for such a meta project is comprised by one elected member of each project and projects may be added/removed to the meta-project as needed to facilitate cross-project collaboration. The meta project PMC is then part of the escalation chain and other policies apply just the same.
```

I thought this would be shorter than a dedicated section at the end (see my comment there). Not so sure about the phrasing here or the need for this at all.

   * This does not mean that there may not be more traditional team structures associated with the project contributors. 
      * For example, a company may have a team working on `cardano-ledger` and that team will probably have a team lead and be organized in typical company fashion. But the company-appointed `cardano-ledger` team lead does not have any special status when it comes to making decisions for the `cardano-ledger` Intersect project.
      * As an example of how this works outside of Intersect, consider GHC. IOG has a GHC team, with an appointed team lead. But the IOG GHC lead doesn’t have any particular sway in the leadership of GHC-the-OSS-project, which is led by its major contributors and its BDFL. In practice, as a good contributor the IOG GH Clead does have some voice, especially in areas where he works a lot, but this is more about his history of contribution than the fact that he is the IOG GHC lead.

</details>

#### Administrative

There are two administrative roles associated with the PMC, Chair and Secretary, which are described in the PMC section.

> Individuals may occasionally be given the Administrator role.

Reviewer: So there are three administrative roles? Or is `Administrator` a "Development" role?

Maybe we should remove these sub-sections and just list roles to not need to explain that split?

Reviewer 2: I believe this is mixing between GitHub repository scope roles and the roles of individuals as members of the Committee. Agree that some clarity here may be important as the Chair and Secretary do not have any additional "power" in the context of the repository itself (they are just Committers) but, the Administrator of the repository *may not* be an active Committer of this repository and instead purely serve as a disaster recovery level and therefore not participate in the regular running or direction of the PMC.

Author: Right, that is confusing. "Administrator" is a development role corresponding that github permission level. The "administrative" roles are the chair and secretary. So also due to the common ambiguity about whether "admin" means "very powerful" or "menial" :joy: I'll try to come up with better phrasing.

</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Examples</b></summary>

* Project X has three dependencies Y, Z, and Q. In addition, there is project R which provides tools for deploying X, and some individuals who act as full-time release managers for X. In this instance it would be appropriate to form a meta-project to collect all of this work.

</details>

### Project Management Committee

A meta-project has a PMC, which functions similarly to a project PMC. 

The members of each sub-project should nominate a member of their PMC to be a member of the meta-project PMC. 
The meta-project should not otherwise elect PMC members.

A project joins a meta-project by its PMC requesting to join and the meta-project’s PMC accepting. 
A project can leave a meta-project if its PMC decides to do so. 

The meta-project PMC acts as the next step up in the escalation chain above the PMC of its sub-projects. 
Decisions made by the meta-project PMC are binding on the sub-projects (of course, they can leave the meta-project or escalate the issue).

### Communications

> Meta-projects should follow the same communication policies as projects.

Reviewer: This is basically a copy of the Project headline. I would strongly suggest to remove this and just make the definition of Project recursive (as a last statement, I'll suggest it above).

Author: I am still torn on this. I do believe that a "project which contains" projects is qualitatively different from a "project that corresponds to software", and it's useful to distinguish them. Eclipse does the "arbitrarily nested tree of projects which all have the same rules" and IMO it's confusing.
